are also bringing flash flooding to
parts of new south wales
at the moment there's a band that sits
about the west of penrith
all the way down into the southern
highlands this is producing very heavy
rainfall and flash flooding is likely in
association with them
many areas are picking up around 40
millimeters over a 30 to 40 minute
period
now we're also seeing that warning
extend down into victoria
we've got plenty of thunderstorms
through queensland although no warnings
in place for that state
at this stage we're also seeing a lot of
activity across the northern territory
there's also a severe thunderstorm
warning that's extending across much of
the top end now
and again it's because we are seeing
some localized heavy rainfall developing
this is all in association with the
developing monsoon trough and we are
going to see very heavy rainfall across
the top end of the territory
as we head into the next couple of days
at this stage mostly showers and
thunderstorms but
could tend to rain as we move into
saturday
around saturday we could see a low
pressure system forming out off the
coast of the northern territory and that
will be watched closely for any cyclone
development
still some very hot air though sitting
through the inland of queensland and new
south wales but
anywhere through the eastern states up
into the north of the continent
widespread showers
and thunderstorms as we move through
thursday they're going to continue
through parts of the east
as we move into friday as well thanks
graeme just briefly new south wales
health has announced two new cases of
covert 19 have been identified in
sydney's northern beaches we'll bring
you more on that in our next bulletin
i will leave you with pictures from the
factory fire still burning
in brisbane there is an update on that
and we'll bring you more
shortly thanks for watching this
afternoon i'm kirsten aiten
[Music]
[Applause]
it's been a year like no other
unprecedented
unimaginable unfathomable there's only
one way to look back on the year that
was
20 bloody 20.
next wednesday at 8 on abc in eye view
[Applause]
all right so let's all please bring our
a game
we're actually looking at the site of
one of the greatest crimes
of humanity depending on what character
i'm doing
it makes me more brave i've always
enjoyed people who
have beliefs that they're certain about
real
sincere belief is like rocket fuel
[Applause]
[Music]
it's more than just comedy abc tv plus
starts january 1. specs returns for a
special episode celebrating music of the
2010s
whether you like to shout geronimo as
you swing from the chandelier or you'd
rather shake it off and get lucky
we've got a show that'll hit you like a
wrecking ball
guests include kate miller heike vance
joy claire hooper and luke mcgregor
with team captains myth warhurst and
alan bro
see you very soon australia the specs
and specs 2010 special
sunday on abc and eye view
whenever you want wherever you are know
the story with abc news
the most trusted news source get
breaking news updates with live
notifications
plus the latest news from australia and
around the world if the situation
deteriorates the hard border comes back
go to news.abc.net.edu or download the
news app
grandstand summer of cricket continues
live and ad free
as australia face off against fierce
rivals india
taking the catch behind every test all
the rivalry
called live at the grounds grandstand
summer of cricket live on abc radio and
the abc listen app
the women's national basketball league
[Music]
have reached their end game
watch the 2020 wnbl finals this weekend
on abc in eye view watch abc news live
stream
anywhere anytime on abc iview
keep up to date with the latest breaking
stories from around the corner
and across the globe and you can catch
up on all your favorite abc news and
current affairs programs
head to abc eye view and live stream abc
news now
tomorrow on news breakfast we've got
plenty of entertainment for you the one
and only eric banner speaks to us about
his
latest big screen role in the homegrown
mystery
the drive and a small screen musical to
light up the christmas season we'll
review
the prom see you then
[Music]
tonight the household contacts of a
covered positive van driver
test negative as new south wales
authorities race to confirm the source
of the infection
[Music]
the australian government takes its bali
dispute with china to the world trade
organization
two women and a young child flown to
hospital after being hit by a car
outside a school in sydney's north west
and emergency crews battle a major
factory fire
in brisbane's east
[Music]
hello welcome to abc news i'm carina
cavallo those stories
shortly but first to breaking news two
new coronavirus cases have been detected
in new south wales in the northern
beaches
the source of the new infections is
under investigation
at this stage no links have been
identified to other known cases
the cases are a woman in her 60s and a
man in his 70s who were close contacts
of each other
new south wales health has released a
list of venues at
palm beach and avalon beach anyone who
attended
those venues are considered close
contacts and
should be tested and isolate for two
weeks
we'll bring you more details on that as
they come in let's take you now to
brisbane where queensland firefighters
are speaking
about the factory blaze in hemet
yeah so we have multiple crews with
approximately 50 firefighters and
support staff here working on a
large industrial building fire
the building is a approximately
90 meters by 50 meters in size single
level
it is fully involved in fire
the fuel load inside is quite
compacted waste cardboard recycling
material so
it's uh extremely heavy fuel load and
it's too dangerous to make entry into
the building
we've got two aerials working on this
eastern side of the property to protect
exposure buildings they are unharmed at
this stage there may be some minor
paint damage on one of them but we are
working extremely hard to protect those
exposure buildings
yeah look all smoke has toxic properties
we have uh air monitoring in place and
if that becomes
a risk we'll adapt our actions and
advice on that we have put out a smoke
advice warning some time ago to the
public
there is smoke has lightened in color
a lot since the fire started um but yeah
so we are making progress
to extinguishing this fire
no at this stage the cause of the fire
is unknown
yeah so a lot of those crews are made up
of normal
fire appliances and they're providing
manpower for
uh running hoses manning hoses
providing the water to these aerial
appliances and other
monitors that are on the ground
yeah so the the building only had uh
four occupants i believe
when um the triple o call was made they
evacuated so all of the occupants from
the
affected building have been accounted
for and are safe
the properties downwind
from the building have also been
evacuated by queensland police
i'm not exactly sure how far but
approximately 500 metres is what we sort
of worked on
yeah so i anticipate the crews will be
here well into the night
to extinguish this and to maintain
control
and to extinguish it yes
sorry um
we have we do have a a blend of
older end new service vehicles
um the one of the the appliances on that
you see on your left
was only brought into service three or
four months ago
um so yeah so it's a valuable asset to
have here for
particular scenes like this
no worries thank you
that's the latest there from the
queensland fire and emergency services
that
factory fire is still burning near the
port of brisbane the cause of the fire
is unknown
but crews are making progress in
extinguishing the blaze but
will be there well into the night there
is a smoke advice warning that has been
issued for the public but the smoke is
not as bad
as it was a short time ago and all of
the occupants just a few of them that
were in the building
when the fire broke out are all safe and
accounted for
to other news the federal government
will appeal to the world trade
organization over china's decision to
impose crippling tariffs on australian
bali
earlier this year china imposed levies
of 80
on australian bali after an anti-dumping
and anti-subsidy investigation
the australian government and the
agricultural industry have repeatedly
denied allegations of anti-competitive
behaviour
and unsuccessfully appealed the tariffs
through
china's domestic processes the trade
minister simon birmingham says australia
will go to the wto
to request formal consultations with
china
we've applied at every step of this
journey
all of the appropriate processes
procedures and courtesies to the manner
in which australia
and australian industries have engaged
with the chinese government
and their chinese counterparts when we
argue for there to be international
rules
and an independent international umpire
to resolve disputes
that when we find ourselves in the case
of having such disputes
we call in the umpire and we ask the
independent umpire
to adjudicate and ultimately to help to
settle
those disputes when initiating this
dispute with china in relation to the
barley industry
we again extend the important offer
of dialogue and discussion as an
off-road
and off-ramp in relation to this dispute
for more i'm joined by professor lisa
tui who's the director of research
at newcastle law school professor tui
thank you for your time
this is widely seen as a positive move
by australia and supported
by the government and the opposition so
what difference will it make
this is a very important move for the
australian government this is the first
time they will have brought a wto
dispute against china
and it offers a very important
opportunity to move away from some of
the political aspects of the dispute and
to
focus on the compliance
of these moves with trade law rules so
how long
does the process take once you engage
the wto
um the process takes a varying amount of
time
we would expect that it will take at
least 18 months to move
through consultations towards a panel
although ultimately a final decision
could end up taking several years
and so what happens in the meantime so
what happens in the meantime is that the
two governments
will go through the wto consultation
process
um which means they will sit down
together step away from some of the
politics of the issue and try and narrow
the legal issues in dispute
if the consultations are unsuccessful
australia can request that a panel be
established and those are
trade law experts who will make a ruling
on this dispute
how well resourced is the wto to deal
with this issue hasn't the organisation
seen its
senior judges sidelined by the trump
administration
yes that's at the appeal level the wto
is still a very well functioning
organisation it's one of the busiest
bodies in the world for resolving
international disputes
um it's resolved almost 600 trade
disputes and
at its panel stage it's never been
busier so
there's there's no doubt that the
dispute can progress through the wto
um and china and australia are actually
part of an agreement
that can bypass the problems with the
appellate body
if it comes to an appeal on this
decision yeah and is that the key here
to try and have it resolved so it does
not need to go to that next stage
that would be ideal resolution through
consultation is always better
and it's part of a mature process
between
trading partners to go through a wto
process
and to use the auspices of the wto to
focus on the legal aspects of a dispute
many commentators have said that china
respects the authority of the wto but
could it retaliate in another way
against australia
um look china has a very good track
record of
respecting the wto's rulings in fact
better than many other countries in the
world
so it's a very um good forum for
trying to deal with those issues there
are complexities around
anti-dumping and countervailing duties
that might mean that this dispute is a
little bit more complex
but it's going to the right forum for
the best possible
chance of resolution so on that point
what are the chances that australia will
be successful here how do we prove we
haven't dumped
our bali in china that's um a very
complex technical question um and it's
going to go
deep into some of the um the more
difficult and interesting aspects of
anti-dumping
law and also countervailing judy's law
so
exploring whether china is within its
rights to
leverage the duties in the way that it's
done
should australia look to take china to
the wto over other commodities
and exports say like wine where china
has slapped huge
essentially tariffs on australian wine
yeah this is something
that australia is no doubt going to
consider going forwards
this is an important first test for
australia and bringing china
to the wto uh australia is not a
particularly active litigant in the wto
system especially compared with
with bigger members so um this is the
sort of the third recent
um dispute that australia has bought in
the wto and yes
more may follow yeah so what can we
learn from the previous action that
australia has taken
at the wto against india and canada
i think what we can learn is that this
is a forum that's based on principle
so even with very good trade partners um
this is the right and appropriate place
to resolve disputes about the
interpretation of the trade rules so
it is a very good sign that australia is
willing to go to this forum
um it's much less political the focus as
i said is on
the compliance with the technical rules
and it's managed by professional
diplomats who are skilled in
resolving disputes professor lisa tui
thanks so much for explaining it all to
us
thank you for having me an extra 10 000
older australians will receive taxpayer
support to stay in their homes for
longer
as part of a one billion dollar
investment by the federal government
clearing the wait list for home care
packages by the end of 2021
was one of the key recommendations in
the aged care royal commission's interim
report
after the inquiry heard thousands of
elderly australians died while waiting
for a package that had already been
approved
the federal aged care minister richard
kolbeck says the government is committed
to reducing the number of people on the
waitlist
while being careful not to overwhelm the
sector
the waitlist has actually made a
significant drop in the last 18 months
going back to march last year the
waiting list
was nearly a hundred and thirty thousand
it's now down under one hundred thousand
those are figures that have been
released today and it continues to fall
so these additional packages will
continue to reduce
that waiting list that's the intention
of the government that's why we're
investing
but we're investing carefully to ensure
that the industry can grow
in in the context of its capacity to
employ additional people
these uh 40 000 packages
this financial year will equate to
something like
six to eight thousand new jobs in the
home care sector nationally so that's an
important factor in the context of
employment
off the back of coven but we need to be
able to
grow at a rate that the industry and the
sector can cope with
we don't want to get into a situation
where we've seen where we flood the
sector
uh so and create something like a pink
bat situation where you have unsafe care
being provided
so we are doing this as we said we would
uh after the royal commission brought
down its draft report we're doing this
carefully we're doing it in
line with what we believe is the
capacity of the sector to grow
we understand how important it is for
people to be able to
be cared for at home that's their that's
their desire there's about a six percent
growth rate
in demand on an annual basis so we
need to do that we also need to do what
we all we've we said we'd do
uh last year and we're working on this
which is to reform the delivery of the
home care system
so that we can get better efficiencies
and more closely align the provision of
care with people's needs
aged care minister richard colbeck there
for more on the funding announcement of
extra home care packages for elderly
australians
patricia sparrow is the chief executive
of aged and community services australia
she spoke to patricia carvalhos on
afternoon briefing
what do you make of the timing of
today's announcement should the
government have waited until
the final royal commission findings or
do you think this is
a necessary package at this stage oh
look it's absolutely necessary we've
known for some time we've as the
minister
just said there's been over a hundred
thousand people waiting
uh these are people who really need the
support to help them to stay at home so
the fact that there are another 10 000
packages
announced today is really good that's
another 10 000 australians who are going
to get the support that they need
and that's really important the minister
made a couple of points including that
we need to grow or provide the the um
packages at a rate that is sustainable
or you end up kind of flooding the
system is that true
uh it's true that we we've got to
attract more workers we need to triple
our workforce by 2050
and we need to make sure that we do
bring in workers that they're properly
trained
but we we think we need to do that as
quickly as possible so we agree that it
needs to be done in a planned way
the more planned it is the more the more
we can plan to bring in workers is
important and as the minister said
there's
real opportunities off the back of some
of the unemployment through covert
for people to look at aged care and come
in and work and do a really important
job of supporting older australians how
about his comparison to pink bats that
if you go too fast or too hard
that you end up with that kind of
situation
is that an appropriate comparison i
don't know that it's a comparison that i
that i would use but i think what we
want to do is grow the system as quickly
as we can to make sure that people are
getting the support that they need but
it has to be the right quality and we
have to have
appropriately trained workers he talks
about a six percent growth and obviously
we know that this is
where aged care is is going this is the
desire of people as they age and this is
often more efficient you talk about the
tripling of the workforce
are we on track to do that what kind of
reforms might be necessary next year for
the government to introduce to allow
that to happen
and i think this is where the royal
commission's going to be really
important it's going to show us the big
picture reforms that we need to make
that will be all-encompassing
to look at what we need to do to attract
more staff
we need more staff we need to be able to
pay them pay them appropriately to the
value of the work that they do
so there are a tranche of reforms that
will need to be put in place for the
workers
um and so announcements like today are
really important and they really help us
to address issues
but we really need the big picture
reforms and the overall reform to take
place
after the royal commission reports next
year if we're going to address all of
those issues
that's patricia sparrow speaking to
patricia carvelis earlier
two women and a four-year-old girl have
been struck by a car outside of sydney
primary school james carmody
joins me now from quakers hill james
what exactly happened here
karina i'm outside mary immaculate
primary school in quakers hill in
sydney's north west
it was school pickup time when there was
a major crash in the car park behind me
it's understood a 35 year old woman got
out of her car
when it started rolling backwards
dragging her underneath and trapping her
beneath
a wheel it continued and hit a woman in
her 60s and a four-year-old girl
now that 35 year old woman who was the
driver she's been airlifted to hospital
after being freed from under the car
she remains in a critical condition with
serious lower body injuries
the woman in her 60s is in a stable
condition with head and neck injuries
and the four-year-old girl is also in a
stable condition
with soft tissue injuries now there were
seven cars damaged in this crash they've
all been towed away
one by one as police continue to look
into what happened here
james what have people at the scene had
to say
so school pickup time it's the last day
of the school year here at uh
mary immaculate primary school so there
were a lot of parents and a lot of
children around i spoke with one mother
who said that all of the children were
very excited for the end of the year and
they were looking forward to school
holidays
it she said that it's just a really
tragic time and really awful timing for
this to happen and
her thoughts are with the family and the
people injured
okay james carmody reporting there from
sydney
a sydney man who fatally bashed the son
of rock singer angry anderson while high
on drugs has been sentenced to
80 years in prison matthew flame was
last month found guilty by a jury of the
manslaughter of liam anderson
in a northern beaches park in 2018.
flame had mixed alcohol cannabis and
up to 10 mdma capsules during a night
out
in darlinghurst and at a friend's house
he was acquitted of a murder charge on
mental health grounds
after claiming to have been
hallucinating that his 26 year old
friend was a demon trying to kill him
he'll be eligible for parole in may 2024
two years ago our liam
had his life taken
his life two years ago
my family and those that love him
started a lifetime
sentence police in brisbane have seized
drugs
1.5 million dollars in cash and weapons
after intercepting an aircraft in
brisbane three men were arrested for
alleged involvement
in an interstate drug syndicate when the
plane from melbourne arrived at
redcliffe airport earlier this week
a further 11 people have since been
arrested
drugs of this magnitude being taken off
the streets of queensland
and the ill-gotten gain taken out of the
hands of these criminals
makes queensland a safer place for us
all to live in
the former nrl star jared hayne will
face a retrial after the jury in his
sexual assault trial was discharged last
week
the 32 year old was charged in 2018
after an incident at a woman's home in
newcastle
hayne faced a two-week trial but the
jury was unable to reach a verdict
he pleaded not guilty and denies the
allegations
victoria's attorney general jill
hennessy has announced she's stepping
down from her ministerial
role to focus on spending more time with
her family
in a statement ms hennessy says
political life can be hard on families
and like everyone managing the collision
between work and family life sometimes
something has to give the labour mp will
stay on as the member for altona
district
and has confirmed she will contest the
next state election
heavy rain and abnormally high tides
have washed away
much of the sand at byron bay's main
beach on the new south wales north coast
reporter bronwyn herbert has more look
the rain has eased and there is a sliver
of sunshine here in byron bay
the bureau of meteorology recently
downgraded the severe weather warning
for across the northern rivers but there
are still
isolated thunderstorms around the region
which is already so drenched after days
of flooding rains
just behind me is bolongju beach which
has really copped a thrashing in the
past few days with these storms
a combination of the heavy rain gale
force winds and
king tides long-term residents say that
this erosion
is the worst they've seen in their
lifetime and up to
two meters of sand has been eroded here
now flood warnings are still in place
across the northern rivers there's a
minor flood warning still in place for
the wilson's river near
lismore there is likely to be a moderate
peak
today later this afternoon at the
richmond river
at korakai and also affecting the
communities of bungawolban
and woodburn and a minor flight alert
further south in the clarence valley
residents of an apartment
complex in canberra have been told to
evacuate immediately
over concerns about the building's fire
safety reporter isaac narucci has the
details
residents of the kelker apartments here
in the canberra suburb of macquarie
have been told to evacuate due to safety
concerns
that could lead to a rapid collapse of
the apartment complex
in case of a fire now we understand that
that is due to pillars in the
underground car park those pillars are
supposed to have a fire safety rating
of 60 minutes and instead they have a
fire safety rating
of zero which means that residents will
have no time to evacuate
if there is a fire now it's important to
note that the strata
managers of the building are the ones
that have put out the evacuation order
but they have no power to evacuate the
building the act government on the other
hand
has given different advice as late as
yesterday our understanding was
that evacuation would not be required
but there was needed there was
the need to do some things such as
refrain from using the basement
the notice that's been provided by the
owners corporation
has taken us a little bit by surprise
it's not the first time madison
constructions which is the construction
company
that built the apartment complex behind
me has been in trouble
for the kilkare apartment so last year
they were summoned to court for
allegedly failing to comply
with the rectification order on some
cosmetic issues now that work still
hasn't been done
and they're due back in court next month
now
madison construction no longer has a
license to build in the act but the
problem is the act government can't
force
them to do anything and that's because
the window to do so
closes 10 years after a building
occupancy certificate
has been granted and this building was
granted one
12 years ago the act government says it
is
looking at changing that law
after more than a month of standing by
u.s president donald trump the top
senate republican has ended his silence
and
acknowledged joe biden's election win
senate majority leader mitch mcconnell
told his colleagues the u.s electoral
college had spoken
and the country now needs bipartisanship
i want to congratulate president-elect
joe biden
the president-elect is no stranger to
the senate
he's devoted himself to public service
for many years
joe biden told reporters who spoke to mr
mcconnell before campaigning in georgia
ahead of a crucial senate runoff there
next month
germans have flocked to outdoor
christmas markets since the early
1300s this year is very different
the nation is going into a hard lockdown
today to stop the exponential rise of
covert 19 cases
all non-essential shops will be shut and
the world famous
markets are no exception europe
correspondent samantha hawley reports
bratwurst washed down with mulled wine
and some festive cheer there's nothing
quite like a german christmas market
germans have gathered like this since
the 14th century
now the stores are closed the spirit all
but gone
everybody loves the german christmas and
with all the
the christmas markets the lights
everywhere we're singing a lot and so on
and this will be yeah absolutely
different to all other christmas before
germany once seen as a european leader
in the battle
against clover 19 is faltering
a rapid surge in case numbers means a
harsh crackdown
on christmas cheer currently every three
minutes
somebody in germany dies with or off
corona
and that of course is the signal of a
of an enormous catastrophe in which we
find ourselves
there was one last shopping rush hours
before
non-essential stores were due to close
schools finished early two and only
limited family gatherings will be
allowed
on christmas day frank
let's weigh up what is really important
to us i will not be celebrating
christmas with the highest number of
guests permitted
most of the nation's 3 000 christmas
markets
will shut we have millions of visitors
every december during the christmas time
here in cologne
and this year 2020 everything stopped
it dropped to zero you can see and feel
that the mood is very low there's still
some creative joy if indiana's best
it's a lovely idea we like it a lot this
year
a drive-through christmas market with
less hot wine
will have to do samantha hawley abc news
the european union is following in
australia's footsteps unveiling new
legislation to regulate social media
companies including facebook
google and amazon the new digital
markets
act could see the world's biggest firms
banned from europe and be fined up to 10
percent of their revenue
if they break competition rules the move
comes a week after the australian
government unveiled its own
media bargaining code to force the
platforms to pay for the content
they use in this proposal
there is a sense of future proofing
because it's also dynamic
we can do investigations uh if it need
be
so that we can see if gatekeepers are
emerging and we
can put them then obligations
and this is of course because without
enforcement
not worth much and here again if a
gatekeeper
breaks the rules we can impose fines if
it's done
several times repeatedly we can also
impose
structural remedies divestiture that
sort of
things armenia and azerbaijan have begun
exchanging prisoners as part of a
russian brokered peace deal between the
two ex-soviet nations
44 captives landed in the country's
capital
and were met by a crowd of anxious
relatives waiting outside the airport
terminal
12 aziri prisoners were handed over to
azerbaijan as part of the same swap
the peace deal ended a six-week conflict
between the two neighbours
over the breakaway territory of
nagano-karabakh
it's unclear how many more prisoners
will be exchanged
time for a check of the weather now with
graham creed we still have some very
unsettled weather across the northern
and eastern states the potential of
heavy rainfall is once again going to be
a feature particularly
through the territory queensland and new
south wales widespread rain in tasmania
and showers and thunderstorms developing
in victoria there's also a pool of very
hot air sitting
over the central parts of the continent
but for queensland showers and
thunderstorms now these could
potentially be severe in the morning and
afternoon across the southeast
the northern inland and also the north
west of the state
for new south wales it's anywhere
through pretty much the east and
two-thirds the potential of localized
heavy falls particularly along the
ranges
and slopes should just be hot and dry
through the far west of the state though
as the trough moves through victoria
showers and storms will develop about
the central and
eastern areas just a little bit of
drizzle and an isolated shower about the
western regions though
for tasmania widespread rain across the
state will become patchy about the
northeast during the day though
and we're looking at the possibility of
thunderstorms about the northwest and
central parts
for south australia just a few isolated
morning showers about the southern
agricultural districts
and possible showers and thunderstorms
developing about the far west later in
the day
for western australia generally dry
across the southwest land division there
will be some showers and storms from the
ucla all the way up
into the pilbara and the kimberley and
the potential of some localized heavy
falls across the top end of the northern
territory
showers and storms about the northern
inland a little bit less likely
and quite windy and hot across the south
[Applause]
[Music]
here are the top stories on abc news two
people from sydney's northern beaches
have tested positive to cover 19.
the cases are a woman in her 60s and a
man in his 70s who are close contacts of
each other
and the source of the new infections is
under investigation
new south wales health has released a
list of venues at palm beach and avalon
beach advising anyone who attended those
venues to isolate
and get tested the federal government
will appeal to the world trade
organisation over china's decision to
impose harsh
tariffs on australian bali earlier this
year china imposed
levies of 80 in response to claims of
dumping
the australian government and the
agricultural industry have repeatedly
denied allegations of anti-competitive
behaviour
a woman has been critically injured
after she was trapped under a car
outside a primary school in sydney's
west
police say the car apparently rolled
back after the woman got out
trapping her under the wheel a second
woman and a four-year-old child were
also hit by the vehicle and suffered
minor injuries
and multiple fire crews are trying to
control a major factory blaze in
brisbane's east it broke out
in a recycling warehouse in hemet and
quickly took hold
the large building is well alight with
thick black smoke billowing
across the area as coronavirus
vaccinations roll out in the uk
and us let's take a closer look at
australia's strategy for inoculation
the government is sticking to its march
roll out plans it won't secure
supply until then but it does expect
three to be available
those are the pfizer moderna and
astrazeneca vaccines which are at
various stages of rollout and approval
by multiple countries
all three have shown extremely positive
late stage test results
the initial shipments of the approved
vaccine or vaccines will be offered in a
three-tiered system
first will be those at risk of dying if
they catch the disease so anyone aged
70 or above or those with acute
respiratory illness
second is frontline workers so those in
health and the aged care sector
third will be essential workers loosely
defined as people crucial to the ongoing
stability of society like emergency
services
food store operators and school teachers
overall the government is hoping to have
all consenting australians vaccinated
by the end of next year
the chief medical officer paul kelly
says there will be a cue to get a
vaccine once the rollout begins
we're on track things are working well
it's very good to see
international developments around the
fisa vaccine now being
given that emergency use authorization
in canada uk and the us and we're we're
looking
to see what the real world experience of
that
vaccine is as
it rolls out in those three countries
and of course we're in very close
um contact with with those three
countries in particular
and other uh regulators around the world
uh looking at
these new developments um when you think
about how extraordinary
it it is it's only 11 months ago that we
had the first
understanding of the genetic sequence of
this of this virus and now
uh we already have um the fisa vaccine
out in the field being being uh
used in priority populations in those
three countries
as well as now uh the likelihood that
moderna
another mrna vaccine will
may well get an emergency use
authorisation in coming days
we've had the first trial results of the
astrazeneca vaccine which is being made
here in australia
in melbourne right now and and that's
also looking promising our aim for 2021
is to have anyone in australia who wants
to get this vaccine
vaccinated and so yes there will be a
cue this is an unusual
event there's been another call for
increased
training for medical practitioners about
the needs of people with cognitive
disability like those with autism
it's the final day of a public hearing
by the disability royal commission
into the education and training of
health professionals disability affairs
reporter nas campanella has been
monitoring the evidence
we heard from toowoomba mum tony
mitchell and her son joshi today it is
not